hello this is leadership live I'm David
Rubenstein coming to you from my home in
Bethesda Maryland a home as I've said
before I've spent more time in the last
30 days than I have in the last 30 years
I've always been interested in
leadership and I'm particularly
interested in leadership in times of
crisis and we have a healthcare and a
economic crisis right now and I always
want to know how are people who are
leaders getting through this leadership
crisis and so we're very fortunate to
have a number of people I'll be willing
to let me talk to them and today we're
particularly fortunate to have somebody
who's been in the middle of a food
crisis in the view of some people
and that is Dave McLennan Dave is coming
to us from Minnetonka Minnesota which is
the headquarters of Cargill dave is the
CEO of of Cargill he's been the CEO
about seven years now been in the
company for almost 29 years a little bit
more than 29 years and he's a person who
knows the food world extremely well so
Dave welcome very much to the show and
thank you for coming on
thanks David thanks for having me it's
good to see you again now Cargill is a
company that is privately owned it's the
largest privately owned company in the
United States is that right I think
that's correct by sales yes and so your
principal business is what is food
production food distribution food
trading yeah it's all of that it's oh
it's food production I mean things
everything from beef to poultry to
chocolate but also food ingredients
things that go into prepared foods or
that occur in other foods is also a feed
for food for livestock as well we do
have a trading business both financial
and agricultural products so that's kind
of in a nutshell what Cargill does and
did you grow up saying I want to be in
the food business how did you get into
the food business you know I my first
job out of college was in Chicago at the
Chicago Board of Trade and I got hooked
on markets and just instantaneous price
discovery seeing the traders on the
floor and how how supply and demand were
you know up close I then got my MBA in
finance and when and when I joined
Cargill I started
the financial arm of the company it was
basically distressed asset investing at
the time but then as I got older and
became you know more involved in my
career at the company I thought this is
a food company not a financial company
and so I started to developing my career
more in the food side as I got more
advanced in my career and how many
employees does Cargill have now around
the world we have a hundred and sixty
thousand employees in over 70 countries
if you count the countries where we sell
but don't have a physical presence it's
probably closer to 125 countries now
this week john theisen who's the head of
Tyson Foods a competitor of yours I
assume in certain areas he said that the
food chain was maybe breaking down in
this country we're gonna have to close
facilities do you agree with that and
are you worried that the food chain is
breaking down I think I would
characterize it that the the food supply
chain is under strain but there's a lot
of supply chains that are under strain
due to what's happening and certainly
there have been food production
facilities in various parts of the
country that have had to close because
of illness or because of supply
destruction but I think basically the
ability of us to produce food is still
there there are going to be momentary
closings moment Ares in the right word
but we had a facility of beef facility
that was closed for 17 days but it's now
back up and running and has been for the
last week so I think the food food
industry and the food supply chain is
resilient I think the people that work
in it every day are resilient so I think
it's under strain but I don't think it's
broken
well in response to mr. Tyson I think
the President issued an executive order
today saying that under the defense
production act he is going to in effect
command that food production companies
stay in business and make their workers
go to work assuming that they have
appropriate protection he's going to
make sure they have enough equipment
another PPE to make sure that they're
operating safely are you aware of that
executive order and do you think that's
necessary to make sure that you can
produce all the food you want in your
fat and your facilities I am aware of it
I saw it on the headline right before we
we sat down together so I don't know the
details but it's going to call the
question of keeping the American public
fed to keep food on the shelves but also
balancing that with the health needs and
the concerns and also the emotional
health of the workers in the plants so
we're going to have to find the balance
between the two of course if you have
illnesses at a plant such that you can't
run you don't have a choice or if you
have certain vital facilities in the
plant that that are ill and can't come
to work then you can't run the plant
either but so far I think by and large
we've been able to the industry has been
able to run we've had tremendous support
from the USDA in terms of having the
inspectors on site you can't run a plant
without USDA inspectors so I think it
remains to be seen of how we're going to
manage that dynamic between the health
and emotional safety and physical safety
of the workers in the plants and the
executive order of which we're still
studying the details well let's let's
talk about for people that don't really
understand exactly how meat is produced
meat is produced in large facilities
where people are working very closely
together so is the problem because
they're so close together you have to
make certain that they're not going to
get this virus and how are you now doing
that and how might you do that under the
new president's executive order well I
mean we have taken a lot of different
steps in the last two months since the
virus began to expand so everybody at
our facilities is temperature checked
before they come in if they show any
signs of any symptoms of COBIT they are
asked to leave and quarantine for 14
days not leave the facility but leave
the parking lot everybody has a facemask
we have no visitors are allowed in the
plant we have appropriate physical
spacing in in the lunch rooms we put up
plastic dividers if people can't have
appropriate physical spacing to your
point there's a lot of people these
facilities a lot of brave and courageous
people that come to work every day and
then take their obligation to putting
food on the shelves very seriously
there's we'll assign at one of our
plants that someone had written that
said thank you to all the employees of
this facility you are feeding 22 million
people a day
so the amount of production is coming
out of one beef facility is pretty
substantial
but many steps have been taken to ensure
the safety and health of the employees
now presumably out of the 330 million
people in the United States they're
eating pretty much the same amount of
food they ate before but they're eating
it differently and in different places
so explain to people who are watching
why for example people now have to let's
say not produce as much food in certain
areas because restaurants aren't open or
or places like McDonald's don't have as
much traffic as they used to how is this
had changed the food distribution and
manufacturing business well I mean
there's been a significant shift as you
would imagine from foodservice to retail
and with restaurants quick serve and
white tablecloth and fast casual all the
different categories have been
significantly impacted by stay-at-home
orders I would say this that the orders
for foodservice in the first three weeks
let's say let's go back to March first
showed significant declines there has
been subtle increases in the last three
weeks because I think number one is
restaurants are getting used to whether
it's curbside pickup or home delivery
take out whatever forms it may take I
think number two consumers are getting
used to it and becoming more comfortable
with the idea of I can't go to my
favorite restaurant so I will allow you
know I'll have them I'll do whether it's
uber eats or one of it door - or one of
the services that can deliver to me or
sometimes the restaurants are delivering
themselves so the shift from food
service to retail has been substantial
and you could then start to talk about
okay are people eating the same amount
of calories when their stay at home and
using shelf-stable consuming
shelf-stable foods versus going out the
fact is is you know from going to
restaurants portions are significant and
so whereas they may not be eating all
the portions the volumes tend to be
larger in food service than they do in
retail but the nature of the way
Americans consumer their food absolutely
has changed dramatically in the last two
months I think I just read that the
average person in the United States eats
roughly five meals a week outside of
their home historically and now it's
maybe just one or two
so people are eating more at home and I
guess if you're eating more at home
you're cooking more at home and is it a
different type of packaging that you
need for producing food for people that
going to eat at home as opposed to
selling it to restaurants or a places
like McDonald's it is because you're
selling more individual packaging when
you're cooking at home or smaller
packaging as opposed to a McDonald's or
a quick sort of restaurant or you know
they may buy you know they bought
packages of eggs that they can use or
maybe they're prepared eggs and and so
for sure the volumes that you see at the
retail level are smaller or portion
sizes I should say the good news and as
I mentioned we had the beef facility
that was closed and its reopened is we
had closed a couple of our egg
facilities since we are an egg supplier
to various restaurants Quick Serve
restaurants around the country and we
have ramped up capacity in the last
couple of weeks as we've seen examples
of demand coming back as I refer to so
but the packaging to your point is you
might buy at a restaurant or McDonald's
or a quick sort of restaurant they might
buy a package of say 100 eggs that have
been shelled already to have in storage
or for that day's cooking you're not
going to see that at home cooking
obviously now obviously at some point
these animals are going to be killed the
cattle where the chickens or the pigs
but now reports are that they're being
killed earlier than normal because
there's not enough demand for there for
our meat for example pigs there's not as
much demand for pork I guess as before
so pigs or piglets are now being killed
earlier than they would have otherwise
been is that true well it's it's it's
starting to show up it's certainly
starting it to occur and it's let it's
to pieces
David which is one is demand so as I
mentioned that food service what people
can't go out to eat or you know the
demand for a curbside or delivery or
pickup it's not the same as is lower
than it is for in restaurants so indeed
a demand has come down on the food
service side there is a story in there
in the local paper in Minnesota which
described a chicken farmer that you know
raised the chickens to
produced eggs that had to euthanize over
25 thousand chickens simply because it
becomes more expensive the eggs are not
being converted or sold in the food
service and and but on the side and the
level of or the component of pork and
beef I think more of that is about
plants being closed so yes it's
technically demand but it's not
necessary demand at the consumer level
it's the fact that many plants have had
to close that process beef and pork and
so then there's a backup in the supply
chain one of the phenomenon that I've
been watching as well which is often
hard to believe is the enormous amount
of cars that are lined up for food in
the United States and food banks or
their equivalent are you surprised that
there's so much demand for food from
people who really I guess now probably
can't afford to buy it in the normal
prices I'm not surprised I mean I think
one of the things the crisis is
highlighting is that the people that are
most vulnerable are the people that are
the hardest hit and I think the fact is
you know food for many people is
unaffordable or very expensive and so I
think so one of the things we're doing
and many companies are doing is
supporting food shelves and food
pantries nolle with with money but also
with in-kind donations and donations of
meals but the fact is food is harder to
get access to with the closure of some
restaurants and so the lines that we're
seeing is it doesn't surprise me to be
honest with you in the food world you
are at the top I presume you're doing
reasonably well financially you don't
disclose your your earnings you haven't
disclosed them this quarter what can you
say you're doing okay or it's really
impacting you financially I'd say we're
doing okay I mean as you said we're
private so we don't we we have released
our earnings we have the unusual
circumstance it's just by virtue of
timing is that our fiscal year runs June
1st to May 31st so we are basically in
the middle of our fourth fiscal quarter
so the first three quarters I mean it's
you know pre covered in after COBIT you
know the first three quarters were all
pre kovat if you look at March first
just to pick a random
random date but to pick a date as to
when things started so you know in the
fourth quarter certainly a pickup and
retail has been helpful but there's also
been demand instructions of it as I
talked about in food service but you
know I say we're doing ok so the if you
look at the stocks the stocks that have
been hard hit in the food area are the
food restaurants and chains like that
but the ones that are doing well the
ones that had problems before packaged
goods and packaged food products are
then a surprise to you that many of them
are now doing much better than before
like Kraft Heinz and so forth it's not I
mean is that you see the shift from
eating away and you as you mentioned an
average of five meals a week and in
maybe maybe it's down to one or zero if
just because they can't get to their
favorite restaurants
but our family is cooking at home or
we're cooking at home more than we ever
have and the fact is companies as you
mentioned Kraft Heinz or ConAgra or
Campbell's people are buying packaged
foods and they're buying shelf-stable
foods so they're buying things that are
gonna last for a while and in some cases
there have been examples of panic buying
and hoarding where people don't know how
long this is going to last and supplies
of the paper favorite foods are going to
be available in a couple weeks or a
couple months time so I think there's
some accelerated demand but overall you
know people are buying things with
whether it's familiar brands or things
that they know are gonna be able to last
on the shelf for awhile but it's a
replacement because they can't go out as
frequently as they could before panic
buying was a prevalent let's say a few
weeks ago it seems to have leveled off
but is there gonna be enough food for
everybody so should I go out and panic
buy some things tonight or is there
gonna be enough food in the food stores
for me to get food anytime I want you
know it's going to depend on where you
are and it's going to depend on your
proximity to where the food is produced
and also to the the demographics and the
buying profile of the local stores but I
would maintain that there is enough food
in the system you may see temporary
supply disruptions for example you
talked about pork and pork production
for reasons that I talked about and beef
production is down about 25 to 30
percent from typical levels however so
just data
one I went in my local grocery store
last night and the meat shelves were
fully stocked pork chicken beef fish but
what was not there still toilet paper
and and and canned soups where there was
nothing and and so people I think I've
been buying up a lot of as I mentioned
shelf-stable products but there's enough
food in the system and but I understand
I mean animal instincts kick in and
people get afraid and so rather than
think okay well food will be the food
system will be up and running and
whether it's through the executive order
or plants coming back online as
employees get healthy again and it's
testing becomes more prevalent the food
the food supply chain is as resilient as
I mentioned now when the CEO of cargo
goes into a food store two people you
know run over to service you or they
know who you are and you got any
discounts in the food stores because
when you show up you're the CEO of the
largest food company you know about two
years ago we make a turkey called
honeysuckle white and I went in and I
was just checking out the turkeys and
the guy came over and said I know who
you are and you know I said I was just
checking out our turkeys and seeing
other physician but I went in last night
and I wore a mask so I was incognito
nobody recognized me and and I was
perfectly happy to do it that way now
talk about farmers at the beginning part
of the food chain in many ways our
farmers suffering enormous financial
losses or are they being subsidized in
effect by the US government
our farmers gonna go out of business or
they're going to be bankruptcies among
farmers or not
well it's I'm very concerned about the
farm community so they've had the
support and certain components of the AG
sector have had government support but
the fact is is as you were alluding to
work your way back on the supply chain
so if you have plans to go down because
of illness or because of demand
destruction which means the livestock
starts to back up and maybe some of the
animals have to be euthanized I think in
the case of beef you know you can change
their diets you can slow down the
processing or slow down the growth and
and so there probably is less instant
immunization of that particular species
but then they are also eating
their feed is grown by the farmers and
the majority of products that are grown
in the u.s. of row crops go into feeding
the livestock so I am concerned about
farmers prices have been low for a long
time there is you know the good news is
there's there's plenty of supply in the
system there's plenty in storage but it
means that the prices are low and that
you know I think bankruptcies last year
in certain segments of the AG sector
were at record high so it's something
that we're keeping a very careful and
thoughtful eye on and there's a
community that needs to be supported so
if I wanted to invest in something in
the food chain now given where we are
should I invest in farming communities
should I invest in producers of food
should I invest in wholesalers should I
invest in traders should I invest in
retail restaurants what would you
recommend I think you know I think that
I think the switch from food service
it's a retail there's gonna be some
permanent level of shift and you can see
different statistics and different
prognostications about how many
restaurants are going to reopen and
certainly there'll be some that they
were small or they were a niche that
won't be able to reopen and therefore I
think retailers will pick up that demand
I also think I would call them healthy
ingredients or organic foods things like
probiotics prebiotics are going to
increase in popularity so we've got a
product for example that we make for
human consumption called epic or which
is a digestive supplement which has been
shown to create greater health so I
think those kind of things that people
can supplement their diets with and
supplement their at home cooking with
especially in light of a pandemic I
think those are going to be those are
gonna do well in the future so it's
probably not a part big part of your
business but food trucks all over the
country they seem to sell food a lot of
people and there are small businesses if
ever there were small businesses are you
worried that they're going to go out of
business no I mean their mobile
restaurants right and so it's a form of
at home eating or
side or door delivery that food trucks
can can move around to locations as
opposed to bricks and mortar restaurants
where they are where they are you know
they're your rents gonna be a lot lower
obviously with a food truck than it is
with a restaurant but I think that
segment of consumption and food service
probably should be pretty well in the
future now let me ask you how you're
managing this busier company now you're
mostly working out of your home but
sometimes you go to your office
is it hard to manage this way because
most your employees are probably at home
I assume so what have you learned about
how to manage your company it's a
gigantic company how hard is it to
manage in this manner I think we've all
adapted pretty well to communicating
whether it's on zoom or Skype or by
phone I think everyone has been struck
and I don't think this is unique to
Cargill but it that it can be done I
missed the face-to-face interaction I
saw a couple people in the office today
and it was almost startling to see some
other faces other than the ones that you
know you're sequestered with and I think
you know part of our culture has been
the social relationships that develop
over in a company over we were 155 years
old so I missed that aspect of it but
you know the building that I'm in today
has capacity for 2,500 people I don't
think we'll ever see that many people in
the building again I think some people
are gonna decide you know what I like
working at home I can be effective I can
you know get my work done my home
computer my home laptop or PC and be
perfectly effective but I think there
are some people that just will want to
continue to have the social interaction
when they used to feel safe but I think
that's been one of the biggest takeaways
is technology's performed very well and
you can be effective in your job in most
jobs working remotely the ones who want
to stay at home in the future may not be
ones with small kids and dogs but that's
another matter so let me ask you if you
have the ability to bring all your
employees back I guess you will do so
but I'm told that some CEOs say and now
I I don't need as many employees as I
thought I did before and maybe I won't
bring them all back is that something
you think is a prevalent view in the CEO
community that you can downsize in the
future
I don't think it's a prevalent view
today and you know Minneapolis st. Paul
is unique and we've got roughly 20
fortune 500 sized public and private
companies headquartered in this in the
twin cities community so there's a lot
of conversation about you know resuming
work and and physical distancing and
when to do it the state of Minnesota our
stay at home order expires on Monday the
4th and I don't think there's any
headquarters company here in Minneapolis
st. Paul that it's going to open the
doors and say everybody come back we're
all you know thinking about how do we do
this how do we have intelligence
sequencing what steps you need to take
whether it's temperature taking
everybody wearing masks but I have not
heard anybody in this community or
really any of the CEOs that I've been
talking to talking about we've got to
you know get rid of people and actually
I really hope that what has happened
changes the the ethos of this country
into realizing that the impact that this
has had on the most vulnerable on the
people that are suffering the most that
has made it worse and that there's more
a sense of you know the phrase that was
being used prominently as you know in
the last year or two is responsible
capitalism so from our standpoint if we
don't hope that we don't have to lay
anybody off other than I've mentioned
we've had to close some plants because
of demand but that's our objective but I
don't think anybody's thinking that way
at this point in time under the trade
agreement that the Trump administration
negotiated with the Chinese the Chinese
are supposed to buy a lot of food
products from the United States you
think in light of their economies
slowing down they'll be able to do that
and do you see any evidence that they
are doing it now I don't think certainly
their economy has slowed down but as I
mentioned we're up and running in China
all of our plants are running and so
they're there and they call it the
recovery stage but I think the fact of
the matter is 1.4 billion people have to
eat
and the Chinese depend on the outside
world on trade in order to feed their
livestock or to supply their to supply
their animal protein for example and
other products to the
population so I do believe that they
will be able to fulfill their
commitments under the trade agreement
that was cut despite the economic
slowdown and we're a better place to
turn than the United States to get those
products and but it's not it's planting
season in North America so ultimately
when harvest season comes in late summer
early fall that's when you might expect
to see both purchases of commodities
going to China where around the world do
you see and your business weaknesses in
Europe emerging markets Asia or are they
all roughly the same now no I mean I
would say Asia I would kind of carve our
China which I described and in South
Korea I mean those are you know they've
had some early rebounds I think
Southeast Asia is probably still you
know dealing with some of the issues
Indonesia Philippines Singapore has gone
back on quarantine with a with a spike
up in in illnesses Western Europe is
ahead of the curve you know in more ways
than one they got after it faster and
it's well publicized you know places
like Germany and and you know Italy in
Spain are starting to come back online I
think Austria started relaxing stay at
home rules so they are ahead of where
the United States is I think South
America is a mixed bag I mean some
severe examples in South America but
probably pretty similar to the United
States so it's mixed but when you have
as I mentioned over 70 countries in the
world like Cargill does it's a diverse
portfolio that provides this diversity
in terms of results and in terms of
where the outbreaks are now you're in
the distribution business when you
distribute food around the world that
you manufactured you produce are you
doing it through trains planes trucks
boats and are those systems all working
as well as they did before yeah I mean
it's all of the above is mostly rail
truck barge and ocean borne
transportation so one of the fun facts
about Cargill is at any point in time
there's about 550 ships on the ocean
with a Cargill source product on at any
point in time but those systems and if
you think about the American food system
and as you were tracing the supply chain
back to the farmer
to the livestock producers to the plant
operators to the retailers it's also the
transportation system and so the courage
of the truck drivers and the people and
the train the train operators I mean we
depend on all of that and it's something
that people I think take for granted
they don't realize how much goes into
manufacturing and distributing food but
to your point we're seeing the capacity
and when I had spoken to the White House
in the past it said can you make sure we
get the inspectors from the plants done
USDA secretary renew is done a great job
of that can you help us make sure we
have access to transportation and
logistics to get the food to where it's
needed and yes it is performing very
well so how is your relationship with
the administration the White House do
they consult you do you talk to them
with form
regularly or how does that work we I
have found the administration but also
members of Congress to be very good
listeners and I have had some inbound
calls where members of Congress have
called us and said how can we help what
do you need how can we help keep the
food supply system running I've been on
two calls with with the White House and
the administration again asking for what
do you need and one was very early on in
the process so it was like second week
of March and one was more recently with
other industries not just food but also
construction and energy and some other
industries as well but I have found them
to be very solicitous of what we need
what kind of support that we need to
have to keep the you know testing to
keep employees safe and to help make
sure that the plant workers are on the
frontline every day are well protected
both physically and emotionally so I
always like to worry about something
going wrong I always look at the glass
as being a half-empty I guess so if I
wanted to worry about something in the
food world that you live in
what should I worry about I would only
say that as I said there may be some
spots shortages of certain kinds of
protein you might not be able to get you
know the exact cut of beef pork or
chicken that you want to have but
ultimately the production is continuing
and the plants are coming back online to
keep the you know the food systems safe
and they keep it
operating but overall I sleep very well
at night and I think you should too
David okay what lesson have you taken
away from this experience are you going
to manage your company differently in
the future are you going to change a lot
of things that you've done or basically
you say I got a pretty good system now
and I don't need to change very much boy
I think you know if we don't change and
if the world the world's going to change
right economically and socially
everything is going to change and so we
will change along with it but I think
the role of technology in our business
and everybody's business has become more
clear and more pronounced than ever
I think the resilience of the food
system the food supply chain has really
impressed me of the people that are in
the plants the people that get the food
to where it's needed
I think the way food is consumed the way
it's delivered and the way people think
about it is going to change dramatically
and so we're gonna get in front of that
I mentioned healthy food ingredients
delivery systems that meet the new world
where people are going to stay more
isolated more socially and physically
distanced we're gonna we're going to
have to change and we will change and we
are already beginning our planning for
that for you know for the future so a
lot of people are depending on your
health because you're running a big
company so tell us how are you making
certain that you don't get this virus
and that you're healthy are you mostly
walking around with masks are you mostly
at home what are you doing with your
children and and your family you know
we're like everybody else we're limiting
who we interact with if we're outside
we're always at least six feet away from
other people whether it's going for a
walk around the block as I mentioned I
was in the grocery store last night and
I wore a mask and I were actually I wore
clothes as well so we're following all
the guidelines of the state of Minnesota
of the CDC I also think it's you know
one of the things you mentioned in terms
of being in your own home I think I've
also set a record for the most
consecutive nights and in my own bed and
I think that's a good thing I mean I'm
getting better sleep I'm getting more
consistent exercise and I think it's
incumbent on anybody in a position of
leadership but anybody anywhere to eat
better and exercise better and to sleep
well and I think having these
new routines means you can develop new
routines and stay healthier for the
future hey Sonu zum fatigue
I took a zoom fatigue but I have the
free zoom where they cut you off after
40 minutes and so that's great because
when the call started getting you know
stale then I get cut off so I'm not I
haven't made up for the premium zoom
well listen this has been a very
interesting conversation Dave I want to
thank you for giving us some insights
into the food world and I feel comforted
that the food is gonna be there at the
supermarket when I go there later
tonight to buy something and presumably
over the next couple months as well so
thank you very much for giving us new
insights and I appreciate your time as a
pleasure David thanks for choosing
Cargill to talk about and thanks for
what you're doing for the country and
what you always have done it's a real
honor to talk to you today thank you my
pleasure thank you
[Music]
you